---
layout: post
title:  "Project Week One"
date:   14-09-2023
author: cpratt
description: How a seasoned pro lays the foundations for project success during the first week of a project
---

## Introduction

Today I am going to explain how an experienced manager can arrive on a
project, follow a few simple but key guidelines to create the foundation
for project for success, and all within the first week.

It doesn\'t matter what formal (or informal) process you are using for
your project, getting things right in week one is really important. It
is full of subtleties, and hard to describe.

Week one often lacks tangible goals beyond 'get settled in' or
'onboarding', and as a result, I don't think people give it the
attention it deserves. In almost everything else we do, making a strong
first impression is paramount to success, and people recognise the
importance of it. So let's do the same with project kick offs, putting
the effort in from the start getting it right and paving the way to
success.

You don't need to be a pro or even a project manager, anyone can follow
this advice and set up their project with strong foundations.

In this guide I'll talk about the key steps that a pro would complete in
the first week of a project...and I'll avoid all the complicated jargon.

## Meet the Hero(s)

Over the course of their career, a typical project manager starts and
finishes numerous projects, spanning a variety of industries. A project
doesn't have to be a software delivery project or even a business
change. Have you ever planned a surprise party? Have you organised a
group trip abroad or project managed a house renovation or extension?

Regardless of what your project is delivering, all require someone to
take ownership of the project; to make sure the right things happen at
the right time, and by the right people.

And, if you are being brought into a failing project, you can apply the
same tips that I'll describe in this guide, to turn your project around
during your first week.

Now, some people will turn straight to a project management methodology
like Prince2 or SCRUM or the GDS framework. But the tips I want to share
with you are things that aren't discussed in your standard delivery
approach. These are the little gems that make the real difference but
that nobody tells you when you start.

## Results

By following the key steps to success, you will ensure that you have:

-   earned the trust of key stakeholders,

-   have a clear understanding of the current situation

-   understand where you need to prioritise your efforts

-   have a team who are willing to follow you into battle

-   and a prioritised battle plan to take you forward

So, what are these keys? Keep reading to find out how you too can set
yourself up for success time after time after time.

## Six Keys to Success

### Key 1: Stakeholder management

When you land on a new project, or even an existing one, you need to
find out pretty quickly who the important people are with regards to
your project.

Stakeholders can come in different guises. They can be people who are
supplying the money who want confirmation their money is being well
spent, they can be passionate people who have grand visions of exactly
what they want from your project. They can also be other delivery teams
who are dependent on your project delivering well and on time.

##### Top Tip
>How do you keep on top of all those new faces?  Simple: keep a log.  Take screenshots of any Teams calls or Zoom meetings where people are on camera and store them in a document somewhere.  You can really help yourself by adding in notes about each person e.g. Darth Vader, Dark Lord of the Sith, skilled negotiator, highly intelligent, bit narcissistic has a pet droid called C-3PO, clashes with Team Jedi.
>
>Details of hobbies, holidays, pets, kids names will give you things to talk about in one to one conversations later.  Over time you will just remember most details but in week one help yourself by taking some notes….but as I remind my children about their social media pages, if you write it down, it will get read.

The sooner you can find out who is important to your project and who
your project is important to, the sooner you can start talking to them.

Some stakeholders will hunt you out to make sure that you hear their
voice and what is important to them, but other stakeholders prefer that
you take the time and effort to work out who they are and to make the
first move. It's easy to start engaging with the former but it's usually
worth the effort to find out who else you should be talking to. The less
obvious stakeholders are often the ones who can tell you important
nuggets of information, such as why your project won't work, why they
understand the passion of the enthusiastic stakeholders but still have
concerns due to elements the enthusiasts are unaware of or unwilling to
address. The sooner you know this stuff the sooner you can do something
about it.

##### Top Tip
>In your first week, treat everybody as an important stakeholder.  You only get one first impression, so don’t accidently dismiss someone because they are not highlighted in the business case as a key person of interest, they could end up being the person who saves your project from failure.  If you have befriended them in your first week, they will likely be an ally ready to act quickly when you need them later!

Once you have worked out who your key stakeholders are, you need to make
sure you get the most out of your time spent with them. They are likely
to be busy people and in your first week you will probably meet more
people than you can realistically cope with.

One of the best ways to engage with people in week one is to listen. I
was once told that I had been given two ears and one mouth and I should
use them in the proportion that had been intended. Despite it being
somewhat offensive, it's actually a really good piece of advice for
project week one stakeholder management.

Have you ever been in a conversation chatting about something and
someone you have never met before starts talking with a voice of
authority? Doesn't it just wind you up? The same is true for your
stakeholders. They want you to listen, they want you to understand the
complexities, the concerns, the time pressures. It's tempting to jump
straight into solutionising or talking about when you have solved this
problem previously somewhere else. Whilst it's great that you know your
stuff, your stakeholder needs to make sure that they have told you
everything that is important to them. Listening to them, and asking
exploratory, engaging questions is the best show of respect you can
give.

Do take the time to listen to not only what people are saying, but also
what they are not saying. Do your stakeholders avoid talking about
dependencies on a particular team? Does one of your stakeholders keep
referring to the fact someone is far too busy. What's really going on?
What aren't people telling you. In your first week you are innocent or
ignorant of all politics. This puts you in a lovely position to ask
questions that you might not get away with later once you become aware
of tensions and powerplays, you can always apologise and back off
gracefully if you overstep the mark.

However, if you sit in the room just listening you run the risk of being
categorised as inactive or ineffective. It's your first week and you do
need to make sure that the stakeholders have confidence in you and your
ability to deliver this project. Remember that it is two ears and one
mouth and not two ears and no mouth. You need your stakeholders to trust
you, demonstrating your ability is a great way to do this. Ask
intelligent, relevant questions, clarify scope when it's being
discussed, you can also fall back on experience and say things like
'I've noticed that you don't do x and y here, is that a deliberate
decision?' 'have you thought of trying a,b,c I used it with a previous
team and it was very successful. Be careful not to just chuck in buzz
words though, only talk about genuine experiences and skills that you
have. Do try to demonstrate the value that you will bring to the
project.

Another way you can demonstrate your skills is to research the project
before joining. If it's a small project in a large government programme
of work, then find out as much as you can about the programme. If it's a
large project in a small sized business find out about the business, who
is the CEO, what is their background, do you have any common associates
in your networks. Try to find out as much about the project, the
organisation and the people as you can. This will assist in you asking
intelligent questions, and also will help you think about which of your
skills you might like to demonstrate early on; what is your biggest
value add to this situation, highlight it.

Within any organisation there will be politics, power plays and
alliances. Try to work out who is pally with whom. You don't need to do
anything with this information in the early days, but start working out
the politics as early on as you can. There is nothing worse than
accidently navigating into a conflict whilst trying to deliver a
project, having early visibility of these allegiances allows you to
navigate around them and could prevent you from trouble later on down
the line. One of the best ways to work out politics is to meet face to
face. If it\'s possible hold as many of your week one meetings on-site
or co-located. This allows you to see the body language as well as the
facial expressions. Who sits next to who, which people were chatting
together over coffee. You can learn so much from the social interactions
that are just not present on a video call.

Stakeholders are exactly that, they are people or teams who have a
vested stake or interest in your project. You might not be talking to
all of them daily. It's good to find out up front how they like to pass
and receive information. What are they expecting from you by way of
engagement and progress reports. There is nothing too tricky about
discovering what works for each of your stakeholders, just simply ask
them and then try to implement whatever they have requested. If there
are 5 people all wanting an update then produce one update and send it
to all of them, or hold one update call. You can be as efficient as you
can with how you implement the requests, the important thing is that you
listen, acknowledge and act on their requests.

My final and possibly most important piece of advice on stakeholder
management is simply to smile. No, that is not some buzz word acronym,
it is smile in the literal sense of the word. You've just joined a team,
your stakeholders are invested in the project, they are excited by what
is about to happen, embrace that. Show your enthusiasm, let people see
you are approachable and friendly. Smiling is infectious. People are
much more productive and successful when they are happy so start off how
you intend to go on, smile.

### Key 2: Environment

When you land somewhere new you need to get a good understanding of your
environment. Think of your first day on a holiday, you find out where
the restaurants are, where reception is, where the pool is, who do I
need to talk to get a towel for the beach. You familiarise yourself with
your environment so that you can navigate around the new environment
effortlessly for the rest of your break.

Starting on a project is no different. You need to rapidly gain as
thorough an understanding as possible about the situation you have
arrived in. We have discussed the importance of stakeholders. What more
simple way to identify some of your stakeholders and understand the
hierarchies than asking to see an org chart? Get your hands on an org
chart as soon as possible and actually study it. If you can understand
who reports into whom early and which departments exist in the
organisation you can start building up a picture of how the company
works. For example, is there an Service Management Team, if yes then you
are likely going to have to deliver a project into an existing working
system, if not then you may be trailblazing and have to set up the
service management team as part of your project, this could have huge
cost and budget implications.

##### Top Tip
>Remember, whilst doing your investigations, be politely tenacious.
People are busy. Taking time out of their day to explain the setup of
an environment that they are very familiar with is really a bit of an
annoyance. People may try to delay having the chat with you, or suggest
you talk to somebody else instead. Whilst you can empathise with their
perspective you still need to get hold of the info you need. There is
no harm in politely reminding someone that you need to have a chat with
them. You can also send a meeting invite and ask them to pick a more
suitable time. If you need information then you have to make the
meeting take place.

As well as people and teams you also need to get a good understanding of
the existing products and services, processes and solutions. What
already exists, what are you going to have to navigate around or
integrate with? Is there a project in flight already responsible for
building one of the key dependencies of your project? For example, if
you are building software to go on a fruit picking robot, who is
building the robot? When is the robot platform going to be ready? When
can you first try adding the software to the robot? You need to find out
what already exists, have standards been agreed to such as building
standards, or design standards.

Business processes are always fun, even the most thorough organisation
will have gaps in their documented business processes. As an
organisation grows it's processes grow and mature with it. Keeping these
process documents and instructions up to date is a thankless task and
one that often gets left out making it hard for new starters to gain an
understanding of what is already in place and set up. The best way to
understand business processes is to talk to the people who follow or
implement them. Ask a call centre agent about what they actually do or a
banking clerk about why they are conducting certain activities. You
won't be able to investigate every step of every process, but you can
talk to people about the main processes and a high level overview of who
is involved and what happens.

### Key 3: Team

Now for me, this is the most important key. No captain is successful
without an amazing team working with them. For me the best teams are
those where the individuals understand what they are responsible for and
also what their teammates are responsible for, they understand the
processes they need to follow and the quality that they are expected to
work to. These things aren't just magically understood on day one. They
need to be discussed and agreed upon.

You need to take time early on to have team sessions where you agree
between you who is responsible for what. Think of any sports team, there
are clearly defined roles and all players understand who is in which
role and responsible for what. The slight difference is that when
delivering a project you might not have such clearly defined roles. You
might also be in a situation where you have fewer people than you would
like, so the missing roles or positions need to be divvied up between
the team members you have. Regardless of the situation, never assume
that people know what they are responsible for. It removes so much
ambiguity and is far more efficient to have a conversation and clarify
these things early on in the project. It also helps to prevent conflict
later on down the line "but that's not my job, I'm not responsible for
that, Steve is".

Another common scenario to find yourself in is where someone else has
designed the team that you are working in. There may well be roles or
job titles that you are not familiar with. Having the early stage
conversations about who is doing what allows you and the other people in
the team to ask and gain an understanding of what these unfamiliar roles
are going to be focusing on. Chances are if you are unfamiliar with a
role title then others in your team are too. Having a role clarification
conversation gives everyone in the team a safe environment to ask 'what
is it you do?' without sounding stupid.

Week one is a fantastic opportunity to understand the work ethics of the
different people in your team. If you set the team a challenge or ask
them to complete a task, who steps up to the challenge without
hesitation? These people are likely to be the ones that you end up
relying on or having in your inner circle. You need to know who has your
back. Not everybody comes to work to shine, some people are happy
turning up getting the job done and going home. This is perfectly
acceptable. But you need to know who these people are so that you don't
overload them when delivering under pressure.

Week one is also a good time to work out who in your team is going to
need more support. You may have some less experienced people in your
team. This may mean that you need to spend more time explaining
processes and ways of working initially because they are yet not
familiar with standard processes. Everyone has to learn, and it is
important that you have patience, but being aware that people may need
more of your support and attention early on will enable you to better
plan the work and manage potential risk.

It's useful in week one to agree with your team how information is going
to flow in and out of the team. Who is going to talk to the senior
stakeholders to get direction and feedback on how the team is perceived
to be working? Is it ok for each individual to talk to senior
stakeholders directly or are the stakeholders incredibly busy and one
conversation would be better for them, with the info brought back into
the team? Different teams and projects will have different set ups, but
it\'s important that the team members understand how they are to receive
key information and share it outwards. Are you having regular 'show and
tell' sessions, how often are these to be held? Are you going to have a
daily meeting to align on tasks and progress or one longer weekly
session? There is no right or wrong answer to meeting frequencies. You
need to put in place what works for the team and the people in the
organisation, but what is always required is clarification and
visibility of what is being set up. People need to understand what is
happening when.

It is very tempting in week one to try to do everything yourself. This
is never a good idea. You need to empower your team members from day
one. People need to start as you mean for them to go on. Give people
tasks and actions and get them to report back to you. There is so much
to be understood in week one. Having an empowered team will be so much
more productive than trying to do everything yourself. It also sets a
precedent, that each player in the team is expected to pick up tasks and
complete them, this is a team and everybody is expected to join in. It
also is a great demonstration of belief in your team members. Nobody
likes to be micromanaged, give people the space to work and let them
impress you, start this from day one to make your own workload more
manageable and less stressful.

Think back to a time when you were part of a successful team. I bet it
was a happy team? Happy teams are usually the most effective. People who
are happy work better, are more productive, and support each other. Week
one if used properly can be so powerful. If you have fun as a team in
week one when the pressure is usually less intense it can set the tone
for how you will work as a team for the duration of your project. My key
message here is try to have fun, be enthusiastic, encourage people to
chat and get to know each other. You want to get the team to bond and
become a team. Give yourselves a silly team name, not only does this
make people feel part of something but it adds a bit of fun and makes
searching for your team info easier later on down the line. Imagine
searching a large company's folder structure for 'Team 1'. You will
probably pull back hundreds of results from decades ago.

What is tricky in the early days of a project is having fun without it
being 'forced fun'. We've all been in those meetings with the painful
icebreakers, 'which animal do you most resemble' or 'what is your
favourite ice cream flavour'. I'm yet to meet anyone who actually enjoys
this type of 'fun'. Equally, let's all go for a beer isn't very
inclusive for your non-drinking team mates. It is hard to get this
right, but that doesn't mean you shouldn't try. Sometimes encouraging
natural conversation is sufficient enough to get people communicating.
The ultimate aim is to get people communicating, but the more natural
you can make this communication, the more successful you will be. The
more genuine people can be in your team the stronger the bonds they will
form, the stronger the bonds the more fluid the dynamics within the team
resulting in a much more successful and productive team.

### Key 4: Governance

With any project there is always an element of 'the boring stuff'. You
can ignore this for as long as possible in the hope that it goes away or
you can tackle it head on. The first approach is just kicking the can
down the road. You are always going to have to address it at some point.
My advice is to get on top of it in week one.

You need to work out which delivery framework you are going to follow.
There are so many different opinions on which project delivery approach
is better. My opinion is that it almost doesn't matter. The key to
successful delivery is to pick an approach, communicate it out, and get
on with it. No project delivery framework is perfect. If you spend too
much time at the beginning procrastinating and looking for the perfect
solution you will just waste time. Choose the framework or process that
you think will be best and start implementing it. When you spot
something that doesn't quite work for your situation or environment then
adapt to overcome it. Being dogmatic about a process is as bad, if not
worse, as having no process at all.

You are going to have to track your project costs. A large proportion of
costs are likely to be the cost of the time people are spending on
delivering the project. Most projects and companies will require you to
complete a timesheet in some form. Get these sorted in week one, make
sure the team knows how to complete them and make sure that the
necessary time recording codes are in place and available to those who
need them. If you set this up in week one you will save yourself a lot
of time, effort and grief trying to get time recorded accurately
retrospectively.

Applying the same approach to document repositories will also save you
pain later down the line. Agree files structures, and document title
formats in week one and get people adhering to the rules and your life
and those of your team members, will be stress free later. Finding
documents 6 months into a project can be a nightmare. Store them
correctly from the beginning and you can avoid all the unnecessary pain
that most teams suffer during the more pressured phases of the project.
Again, the specifics of which rules you want to implement aren't the
important thing here. What is important is that you set something up,
agree it with all team members and get people using a uniform way of
doing things so that you can navigate it later. If you need to tweak it
later, so be it, but you are tweaking or changing something that is
organised rather than trying to bring order to the chaos that has
evolved over the last number of months.

The final element of governance that you need to think about in week one
is your escalation process. What are you going to do when you have a
problem that you need support from someone else to fix? What will you do
if a project you are dependent on is cancelled? It's unlikely that you
will need to use the escalation process in the first week but it is
important that you set it up so that it is there when you need it. You
need to think about escalations up the stakeholder chain of command but
if you are a contractor brought in to manage a project you will also
need to think about the escalation process within your own company. Who
will you talk to if your client is acting unreasonably?

### Key 5: Scope

Scope is possibly my favourite key. This is where you get to learn about
what you will be working on and delivering. You can ask questions like a
small child, 'what does that mean?', 'why?', 'when does that happen?'.
You can ask and ask and ask in week one and you have the safety of
knowing that there are no silly questions, because you are new to the
situation. You can also get away with asking the same question a few
times over. People are more easy going during your onboarding and
learning period, you should really take advantage of this to gain as
much knowledge as you can. It's really important to hear the stakeholder
explaining what they understand the scope of the project to be. Having
key stakeholders talk through exactly what they want will give you much
more clarity on what is expected.

When asking about scope, it is important to get not only the project
scope but also the context of how the scope fits into the organisation.
You can do this by finding out about the company or programme goals and
visions. It is important that you understand the holistic picture of the
organisation\'s ambitions. Having this context will allow you to
discover dependencies and also understand higher level priorities.

One of the pitfalls people make when trying to work out the scope of
their project is they forget to ask what is out of scope. This is often
a much more important question than what is in scope. Finding out what
is explicitly out of scope can save you time, effort and budget later.
It can also be crucial in managing your stakeholders expectations. There
is nothing worse than assuming something critical is out of scope only
to see the look on your stakeholders faces later when they realise you
aren't planning on delivering it.

##### Top Tip
>You should take the opportunity in week one to ask people to explain
acronyms. We all do it, talk in TLAs, but there comes a point on a
project where you are expected to be able to join in with the lingo. In
week one stop everybody who uses an acronym and ask them what it stands
for. Don't forget to write them down somewhere for you to check back
against later.

### Key 6: To Do List

The final and simplest key is to write a to-do list. During week one
there will be so many actions, tasks and things you want to investigate
further. You need to write them all down otherwise you WILL forget. You
will also take far more actions than you will be able to complete, so
write them down and last thing on the Friday afternoon spend 15 minutes
prioritising them for your start first-thing on Monday morning. It's a
silly little thing to do, but you will thank yourself for it when you
sit down on Monday after a weekend off and realise that you were
bombarded with so much information during week one that you have not
managed to retain it all.

## Conclusion

Week one on any project is fast paced, possibly chaotic but certainly a
time when you will be taking on more information than you can process.
The more successfully you manage the first few days on your project the
better positioned you will be to handle the inevitable challenges later
on down the line. Do yourself the favour of following the 6 keys to
success on your next project, you won't regret it!

