---
layout: post
title:  "Remote Workshop Readiness"
date:   2023-09-07 10:31:51 +0100
author: Atika Bennamane
---

Things to consider before diving into your workshop to make sure it's as
successful as can be.

**About this series** - the Scott Logic Playbooks are designed to be
small practical guides for IT professionals. We draw on our collective
experience to tackle topics that we don't feel are addressed elsewhere.
Our hope is that these little 'value adds' will help you just as much as
they have helped us.

## Intro

One of the hardest things in software engineering isn\'t technology,
it's people! Whether we're soliciting requirements from stakeholders or
performing an incident post-mortem, effectively engaging with the people
we work with, and for, is vital.

Workshops are an important engagement tool, allowing people to work
together as a team. If run effectively, they can rapidly surface ideas,
requirements or concerns, with collaboration resulting in a better
quality output than you'd likely achieve through talking to each person
individually.

Well, that's the theory.

Unfortunately, workshops aren't always easy. There are a whole host of
ways they can go wrong (many of which we'll cover in this playbook). And
more often than not, once a workshop is heading in the wrong direction,
it's downhill from thereon.

And there is now an even greater challenge, many software professionals
are remote- or hybrid-working. These days we rarely have the luxury of
bringing everyone together in the same location, and probably never will
again (until VR finally becomes a thing ... yikes!). We all know how
uncomfortable virtual meetings can be, the technology glitches,
home-working distractions and quite simply, the lack of genuine human
interaction. These all significantly undermine the togetherness that
makes workshops ... work.

For better, or for worse, remote workshops are here to stay, and it is
our job to try and make them effective. In this playbook we'll cover the
challenges we've found and provide practical solutions that will
hopefully put you on the right path.  

## This Playbook

This Playbook has been split into three different sections, 'Before the
workshop', 'During the workshop' and 'After the workshop' as there are
distinct activities related to each of these your workshop timeline. The
intention is that this guide can be used as and when you need it rather
than attempting to read the whole thing at once.

'Before the workshop' is about planning and things to consider that
aren't always obvious yet experience has shown to be crucial steps when
it comes to arranging an online workshop. In some ways this is the most
important part of the process as the work that goes in prior to the
workshop can set you up for hitting your workshop goals. Conversely,
skipping these considerations can leave you frustrated and bogged down
in workshop chaos.

The 'During the workshop' section contains lots of tips about how to
"bring the energy" and drive the most engagement from your attendees
that you can. Creating the right atmosphere can make a huge difference
to the content and feedback that your workshop will generate.

'After the workshop' will help you make sure that you know what you need
to do with all the information that you have just gathered from the
excellent workshop you just ran.

## Before the workshop

### Team Distribution

Working together in the same location makes it easier to keep everyone
highly engaged and accountable but as we all know, in the new normal,
this isn't a regular occurance. When you have a distributed team, you
have to work harder to keep them focused on the task at hand instead of
the million little distractions the Internet, and home life, has to
offer.

Ahead of the workshop, consider your team's distribution:

**Where is everyone?**

-   Is everyone in the same place?

-   Is mostly everyone in the same place?

-   Are some people together in one office and some together in another?

-   Is everyone remote?

-   What about time zones?

Make sure you know the answer to all of these questions and you have
considered how this is going to impact your format of choice or whether
it needs to be adapted. Ahead of time, it's good to make sure everyone
will have equal ability to participate. Check that they have access to
any tools they need to do so eg: screens, cameras and mics wherever they
happen to be joining from.

### Hybrid Considerations

With many people in our industry working a mix of remote and from the
office there are some times when it'll be necessary to run workshops
hybrid style - with some attendees in an office in person and some
remoting in. If you are doing this the most important consideration is
*is everyone going to have an equal experience on the call?*

When there are people face-to-face in the room, the temptation may be to
have easier conversations with them, perhaps even side chats that those
in the call can't pick up on. Similarly, if you are using an online tool
to facilitate the meeting, ensure that those people in the room can see
and interact with the tool just as well as those online.

-   Is everyone going to be able to contribute equally?

-   Can everyone be seen and heard equally? Do you have a good enough
    camera in the room to pick up everyone's faces?

-   Can the participants in the room interact with a tool as well as
    those from elsewhere? Consider suggesting they bring laptops so they
    can see an online board and interact with it.

-   Is the meeting room kitted out well enough? Do you have a
    speakerphone that can hear and be heard by everyone in the room?

-   Plan in advance how you want everyone to interact. If you are using
    a physical whiteboard or digital smart board, can people in the room
    and elsewhere add things to it?

### Numbers

The number of participants you have should play a key part in informing
the format of the workshop you choose. Not all workshops are suitable
for very small groups just as not all workshops can run successfully
with a very large number of participants. Different structures and
requirements will be needed depending on the size of the group

-   For large groups (over 15 participants) have you considered:

    -   Splitting the group into smaller groups and running the same
        workshop more than once

    -   Time considerations - You may think your format takes 30 mins,
        and it probably does if you have a group of 4 people. Consider
        the amount of digital post-its which are generated and the
        amount of conversation that takes place if you have 20 people!
        30 x 5 is suddenly quite a large number. It doesn't always
        translate so directly but it is worth noting that larger groups
        will equal more time on the call.

    -   **Does everyone joining definitely need to be there?** (think in
        reference to your goal). Remember it's a workshop not a
        presentation, the more is not always the merrier when people
        have tasks to do and things to discuss.

    -   **The larger the group, the higher the formality barrier for
        individual contribution**. This can be down to intimidation of
        speaking in a large group as it automatically creates a more
        formal environment. Willingness to share random thoughts and
        ideas that haven't been properly thought through will also go
        down with this increase in formality.

-   Are breakout rooms and sub-groups required at points throughout the
    workshop?

    -   To help focus and generate conversation, breakout rooms for two
        to three people can be beneficial.

    -   Remember to keep these groups as small as possible, if the
        number goes above three they will require a moderator to keep
        the conversation moving which means more facilitators and is
        more time consuming when it comes to planning and organising.

### Agendas

We have all been included in workshops and meetings where several
participants have no real understanding of the purpose or goal, the
facilitators also get lost and go off on tangents and can steer the
discussion off-track. What follows can be a dysfunctional time sink and
is one of the reasons that meetings in general have a bad reputation.

**An agenda is a great tool to help avoid aimless workshops** that waste
everyone's time. It'll help your team set clear expectations of what
needs to happen before, during, and after the meeting.

It's advised to document:

-   A public agenda for participants

    -   An effective agenda is a plan you share with your meeting
        participants. This can be simple bullet points and a high level
        schedule of how the workshop will run and when different
        activities will take place.

-   A private agenda for hosts

    -   Consider having a more detailed agenda with cues, prompts and
        links for those who are running the workshop to help keep things
        running smoothly

    -   The more complex your workshop the more important your private
        agenda is for facilitators to keep things on track, especially
        when it comes to breakout rooms and multiple activities running
        in parallel.

### Tooling

There are hundreds of available online tools for every kind of workshop.
Choosing the right one can feel daunting. Here are some points to
consider to help you decide whether you have the best online tool for
your workshop.

-   Is there a tool that the participants already know or are familiar
    with? This will help you avoid onboarding time.

-   **In general the simpler the better**, consider what is the simplest
    tool that will allow you to achieve your desired outcomes from the
    workshop? Does the tool you have selected have more features than
    you require? If so, consider something more paired back to avoid
    participants getting lost in the interface.

-   **There is such a thing as too simple however**. Consider what would
    happen if you used a word doc or a spreadsheet as the backdrop to
    your workshop, what associations does thinking about these apps
    bring to your mind? This would create a completely different
    atmosphere and output and could make things less free flowing.
    Digital post-its, stickers or whiteboards can help create a more
    creative environment for idea generation.

-   Do we have a company account with the tool, are there any security
    considerations about where the information is being stored or used?

-   Many tools have several features that are most likely not required
    for your workshop. Consider assigning homework so that participants
    can spend some time using the tool prior to your workshop and make
    sure that you let them know what functionality that they need to
    know about so that they don't get lost.

### Roles - The Facilitator

Let's take a moment to look at possibly the most important part of your
online workshop, the facilitator! What do you need to do and what you
definitely should not be doing:

-   Rule number one for any facilitator, **they should not be taking
    part in the activities**! Read that again as many times as you need
    to. If you are arranging a workshop that you need to contribute to,
    that\'s ok, you just need to find someone else to be the
    facilitator. Do not attempt to contribute to and facilitate the same
    workshop. Here's some high level issues that can create:

    -   Dropping the ball on timekeeping whilst you are distracted by
        activities.

    -   Steering the workshop to suit your own ideas and thoughts whilst
        steamrolling over the other participants.

    -   Ending up confirming your own thoughts and biases without proper
        input from the rest of the group.

-   **Timebox, timebox, timebox!** If you only bring one thing to the
    workshop as a facilitator this should be it. Keep things moving!
    Without timeboxing your whole time slot can be wasted on a topic
    that is not valuable or does not create a useful output.

    -   It can be difficult to interrupt people who are deep in
        conversation, try setting a physical alarm whether that's part
        of the tooling you\'re using or even if you need to grab your
        mobile phone. Make sure everyone can hear it and let them know
        it's time to move on. If the conversation is valuable, put a
        note in your parking lot which we will discuss later in the
        document.

-   **Create energy and atmosphere**. As the facilitator you are
    responsible for the pace and tone of the workshop and making sure
    everyone has an equal chance to contribute to the outcomes.

### Other Roles

Clearly all workshops need a facilitator but have you considered whether
it might be helpful to allocate some other roles to help manage your
workshop?

Having assistance during the workshop can be a great help. When you have
colleagues helping you take notes, screenshots, or keeping time, it
allows you to focus on adequately explaining what happens next. This
way, you are not juggling too many aspects at once, which makes for a
smoother experience.

-   **Co-facilitator**- someone to lean on and manage certain tasks
    where you can take a break

-   **Chat moderator** - someone to keep an eye on the chat and prompt
    you if questions are being raised to prevent you from having to keep
    one eye on things

-   **The Decider** - someone to decide actions and next steps, could be
    the facilitator or the key stakeholder on the call. Make sure it's
    established who this person is.

### Onboarding email

**Your onboarding email is a place to let people know what to expect
from your workshop** and clearly state your intent. This is where you
can use the Agenda you have prepared so that people can see the goals
and structure of your workshop.

-   A chance to let people know in advance of any tools they may have
    not used before

-   Etiquette - mention if you would not like to have the email
    forwarded to other people so that if you have a carefully selected
    group it is not disrupted.

-   Interaction preferences - find the hand in teams going up when
    you're speaking distracting and prefer if people don't use it? Let
    them know some of your preferences here

-   Goal of the workshop- a good place to make this clear

-   Remember to include links to any other relevant documentation or
    information that participants might need

## During the workshop

### Generating Energy & Atmosphere

Remote workshops often lack the buzz of people being in the same room.
As a facilitator you need to bring more energy than you would in-person
in order to keep people energised and motivated.

-   Consider your tone and facial expressions, what attitude are you
    bringing to the group and is it the one that you want?

-   Are there any ways you can make the workshop more exciting?

    -   Sometimes using physical props, even remotely, can help to break
        up the monotony. Ask participants to use pen and paper to write
        things down and show them to the camera. Mixing the physical
        with the digital can be a good way to build energy and momentum
        in your workshop.

    -   Ask people to sketch or draw ideas, **getting creative can help
        us use different parts of the brain and prevent fatigue.**

    -   Music and sound can also be a way to bring the digital into the
        physical and create a feeling of shared experience.

-   **Check in with your participants.** If you're running a longer
    workshop, make sure you've scheduled time slots for breaks,
    reflection, grabbing a coffee or a comfort break. A good way to
    check in can be to use chat and ask the participants to vote on
    whether they need a break or would like to continue.

-   **Set your intention** and make your goals clear. There's nothing
    worse for draining energy than being on a call that is meandering on
    without clear intention. Help keep people focused on the goal either
    verbally or use a visual cue in your tool to help steer people back
    to the point.

-   If you have achieved the outputs that you need, **don't be afraid to
    call time** on your workshop. The length of time your activities run
    for is not the measure of success, gathering the right information
    or helping people to learn something new is your success measure.
    Dragging things out for the sake of filling a time slot will
    inevitably create a flat atmosphere.

### Icebreakers

Although these quirky activities can be considered 'cheesy' at times,
icebreakers are really useful tools to help create a conversational
environment and make people feel more relaxed, **remember: formality is
a barrier to naturally flowing conversation**. To counter potential
mixed feelings about icebreakers in the group, make sure you keep them
short enough that no one feels annoyed or like they are wasting time but
long enough that every member of the workshop has had a chance to say
something. If you have a group of 10 or more, you may want to consider
breakout rooms for your icebreaker.

There are an infinite number of different activities that can be used as
an icebreaker and I won't attempt to capture them all here. Simply have
a google and see what inspires you. Here are some things to bear in mind
when selecting the right activity for your group.

-   The goal of an icebreaker is to make people feel more comfortable,
    will your selected activity achieve this for your participants?

-   If there are people on the call who don't know each other that well,
    will your icebreaker help them get to know each other better?

-   Have a backup plan. Some activities will not go over well with some
    participants. Make sure you have some simple questions that you can
    use if your icebreaker turns out that it's not going to work for
    your group.

### Collaboration and Engagement

**Did you know, one in three people has claimed to feel drowsy or even
fallen asleep during online meetings?** Make sure you put together a
varied program for your workshop with different types of activities to
keep people's brains engaged. Include interactive activities and
challenges to get people working together. Here are some things to
consider when it comes to collaboration and engagement.

-   Create regular opportunities for participation, and make sure people
    know when and how to participate.

-   Breakout into small groups, which makes it easier for less confident
    people to contribute, and provides more opportunities for informal
    interaction and personal connection.

-   Include a live Q&A. To boost engagement, let participants choose
    which questions get answered.

-   Introducing gamification. This adds a fun, unexpected element, and
    really boosts engagement. Some examples of gamification include:

    -   Problem-solving challenges

    -   Competitions

    -   Voting

    -   Digital leaderboards

    -   Consider incentivising asking and answering questions with
        scoring or points for the most digital post-its that have been
        contributed to the board.

### Keep it moving

Tangents aren't always a bad thing but they can distract from the goal
of your workshop. As we have discussed at various points in the
playbook, make sure that you keep your eyes on the prize and are focused
on your desired output. Telling people to be quiet or to move on can be
intimidating, uncomfortable and spoil that feeling of psychological
safety that you have just worked so hard to create. Here are some tips
and tricks you can use to keep your workshop moving along without
upsetting yourself or anyone else.

-   **Create a parking lot**. A parking lot is a space where you can
    capture interesting thoughts, ideas or actions that may not be
    entirely relevant to the exact content or goal of your workshop. By
    capturing these ideas or conversations with a quick note, you and
    the team can choose to return to them at a later time or on a
    different call. This will help people to feel validated and make
    sure that they feel heard whilst also keeping your workshop on
    track. Make sure your parking lot is somewhere visible to the group
    so that it feels tangible and they can see that their thoughts or
    concerns have been captured.

-   **Alarms and timers are your friend.** As we mentioned earlier in
    the playbook under the facilitator role, timeboxing is one of the
    most crucial elements of running an online workshop. If the tool you
    are using has a built in timer, make use of it at every opportunity
    you can. If it doesn't consider setting alarms elsewhere, either on
    your phone or maybe even an egg timer.

-   **Be up front about time management.** Let your group know what
    amount of time is going to be allocated to specific tasks or
    conversations. This is good information to include in your agenda at
    the beginning of the meeting but you can reinforce it as you go by
    mentioning the proposed time box for each section as they begin.

## After the Workshop

### Sharing the outcomes

Once the workshop is complete, make sure any insights gathered are
shared with the right people in a timely manner. Remember they probably
don't need a blow-by-blow of every activity that took place, this should
only be key learnings or actions.

-   **Summarise your workshop** whilst you are on the call. This can
    make sure you have verified your understanding of any insights or
    actions with the participants. If an additional meeting is required
    for this to discuss and assign actions make sure to set one up.

-   **A call is always the best way to share your workshop insights**
    with key stakeholders as they may want to ask questions or dig
    deeper into certain areas so take the time to set something up
    rather than just sharing text based information.

-   **Make sure any actions that were generated in the workshop have an
    owner** and that there is a way to follow up or track what's
    happening with the actions.

-   **Have a bulleted list of insights** and include this in your
    insights meeting invite to help you remember what you need to cover.
    This will also give the people you're sharing the feedback with more
    time to consider the topics.

### Gather feedback on the workshop

A great way to improve your workshopping skills is to gather direct
feedback from your participants once the workshop is complete. Some ways
to do this include:

-   **Using a very quick poll** with one or two key questions you're
    interested in learning about.

-   **Ask them to respond to an email** with something they liked about
    the workshop and something that they didn't like about the workshop.

## To Summarise

Remember that people's time is precious and that we can all suffer from
meeting fatigue at times so always keep that in mind as a guiding light
for any workshops and meetings you create. Keep to the point and have a
clear goal in mind, bring lots of energy and enthusiasm to keep your
group motivated. Don't worry if you make a mistake or run a workshop
that just doesn't... work! It will happen and that's ok. Keep
experimenting and trying out new things. Don't throw in the towel on
your quest to become an excellent facilitator. This is a time for key
learnings and growth. Seek guidance from one of the many veteran
workshop facilitators here at Scott Logic or look for tips online to
help you learn about different workshop formats. Running workshops
online can be a challenge but it's a challenge that's worth embracing
and hopefully even enjoying as you hone your facilitation skills.
